MNEMOSYNE LOCAL SNAPSHOT CATALOG / 1

API: EvidenceSnapshotCatalog(Path existingDedicatedDirectory), seed(root, pin),
append(incoming, expectation), read(pin), entries(). All filesystem operations
report checked IOException. No existing public method or exchange schema changes.
The caller explicitly supplies a dedicated directory. Opening never creates it.

Each committed entry is a canonical EvidenceExchange.encode(snapshot) file:
SHA256(EvidenceExchange.encodeRecord(snapshot.manifest().reference())) +
".snapshot.json". Digesting the whole structured reference avoids delimiter and
path traversal aliases. Catalog read verifies exchange membership/content,
canonical bytes and path/reference agreement; pinned read additionally verifies
the expected whole-exchange SHA256. No mutable index, pointer or head file exists.
The catalog format version is EvidenceSnapshotCatalog.FORMAT; payloads retain
the existing exchange schema. Unknown files without the catalog suffix are not
entries. Catalog files with invalid bytes/names/types fail reads/inventory closed.

seed explicitly accepts only a parentless snapshot and calls EvidenceAdmission
with the snapshot as both inputs and the expected pin on both sides. This proves
integrity/replay consistency, not source authenticity. Multiple explicitly seeded
roots are allowed; none becomes a preferred root or head.
append resolves the expected parent in this catalog, then calls EvidenceAdmission
with the stored parent, incoming snapshot, and caller expectations. Missing parent
is a conflict. An admission conflict never reaches publication. An existing target
identity with identical canonical content is REPLAY; changed content is CONFLICT.
Replays still validate the supplied parent/pins. Siblings preserve independent
full snapshots and may disagree without cross-branch record merging.

Results report STORED, REPLAY or CONFLICT, a typed reason, the caller expectations,
and the exact admission result when admission was reached. Results/receipts are
returned in memory, not separately persisted; snapshot bytes contain their parent
reference and record digests. A durable conflict log would violate this phase's
no-write-on-conflict contract and is not added. No authenticity or scientific
judgment is attached to successful storage.

Publication: encode/validate first, write an exclusive private staging file beside
(not inside) the catalog, force its bytes to storage, then publish by hard link.
The hard-link create atomically fails if an identity file already exists. There
is no overwrite fallback. A losing writer reads/validates the winner and returns
REPLAY or CONFLICT. Finally it removes only its own private staging pathname.
Only the winner creates a catalog entry. Sequential conflicts and replays create
no staging file and leave catalog contents/mtimes unchanged. A racing loser may
have made a private staging file; it removes that file and never replaces the
winning entry. It cannot prevent the concurrent winner's legitimate append.

Platform boundary: a trusted local filesystem with hard-link support, writable
catalog and parent directory on the same filesystem. No advisory locks or process-
local mutexes are relied on for no-replace publication. Tests use independent
instances with concurrent threads on the local filesystem; separate processes,
network filesystems and alternate OS/filesystems were not qualified.
Symlink final directory/entries are rejected, but this is not a defense against
hostile administrators, ancestor replacement, or arbitrary external mutation.

Failure boundary: data bytes are forced before publication. No directory fsync or
power-loss durability guarantee is claimed. A crash before publication can leave
an unlisted private staging file; a crash after publication leaves a whole entry
visible. Cleanup failures after publication can report IOException despite a
committed entry: callers must use pinned read/retry to resolve the outcome. Never
roll back/delete the immutable entry. No automated sweeping or repair is provided.
Corrupt entries raise IOException; they are never normalized, repaired or replaced.
Inventory is a sorted scan, not a transactionally consistent view under concurrent
appends and not a catalog-wide scientific or ancestry validation operation.
Per-snapshot EvidenceExchange.MAX_BYTES applies (16 MiB); no scalability claim.
